So we never actually calculate
power in the way that I've
described in the previous slides.
That's for understanding the concepts,
and we assumed we knew sigma and
the data for either Gaussian or
that, that sample mean
could be believed to be Gaussian
because of the central limit theorem.
I, I think for me personally
the most common function I use for
calculating power is this
function power.t.test in r.
So let's just talk a little
bit about t test power
before we talk about how
you use power.t.test.
The argument is very similar to what
we did in our normal distribution case.
We're going to reject if our
test statistic, in this case
x bar minus mu0 over the estimated
standard error is now bigger than a t
quantile rather than a z quantile,
because we're talking about a t test.
Only because we're talking about power,
this is going to be calculated not under
the hypothesis that mu equal to mu0, but
under the hypothesis that mu equal to
mu a, the value under the alternative.
It turns out that this statistic, x bar
minus mu nought, over the standard error,
does not follow a t distribution,
if the true mean is not mu0.
If it's mu a, and mu a is different from
mu0, it doesn't follow a t distribution,
it follows something called
the non-central t distribution,
which we're not going to cover.
So, calculating this power,
calculating power requires the ability to
evaluate the non-central t distribution,
and that's what power.t.test does for
you on your behalf.
What's nice about power.t.test is just
like before, we have some parameter
that we know, mu naught and alpha, and
some parameters that we don't know, mu a,
sigma and n, for example.
And if you omit o, omit one of them but
specify the remainder power.t.test will
solve for the one that you've omitted.
So lets go through some examples of using
power.t.test to either calculate power,
or calculate sample size, or calculate
the minimum detectable difference.
Okay, lets go to a couple examples and
I'm going to point to this
middle one here first I'm doing
power.t.test so
its calculating t test power,
we're testing H0 mu
equals to mu0 verses Ha.
And then the question is whether it's
doing a one sided or two sided test.
Well in this case,
you can see here I have always specified
alternate equals one sided, so that's mu,
greater than mu0 is what it's testing,
or equivalently, mu less than
mu naught if you appropriately specify
the difference in the means is negative.
So delta here, this parameter,
is the difference in the, the means.
So if I specify n,
I specify how different mu a is from mu0
and I give it a standard deviation of 4.
I'm telling it its a one sample t test.
And I want one side of power and
then I'm grabbing the power part of it.
Then it gives me back my power, 60%.
What I show here, you notice in all
the other examples I've given here,
it also gives 60% as the number.
And what I'm showing is
that the power.t.test,
just like the normal power, only defen,
depends on the effect size.
How different mu0 and
Mu a are divided by the standard devi,
this standard deviation.
So here, I specify my delta as 0.5,
and give it
a standard deviation of 1, and notice, so
if I'm defining this numerator as,
as delta, notice this is the same
effect size as in this case right here,
okay?
And since everything's getting a little
clouded let me re-grab my marker.
So, delta divided by sd is
equivalent between that power.ttest,
p, power.t.test call and
this power.t.test call,
and that's why they give the same number.
The same thing is true here, okay?
Where it's 100 and 200, and
if you divide the two you get 0.5.
So it's also true there.
Let's go through a couple more
examples of using power.t.test.
Now, in these, all of these cases,
I calculated power
while inputting n delta and
the standard deviation.
Now, let's try to
calculate sample size where
I give power.t.test
the power that I would like.
Okay.
So, now here, I'm going to,
again, show you in all three cases that it
only defen, depends on the effect size.
So here, I'm specifying delta 0.5 and
my standard deviation of 1.
So an effect size of 0.5 divided by 1 or
0.5, and
I'm telling power.t.test, I'd like to
know what is the relevant sample size,
if I wanted a power of 80%,
then over here, you know,
again I'm doing one-sample and
one-sided, and grabbing n, okay?
And it gives me a sample size of 26, and
then in these kinds of calculations,
you always want to err on
the side of conservatism.
So you bump it up to 27 whenever you
get a fractional value, you always get
a fractional value, you always want
to bump it up to the nearest integer.
So you need a sample of size 27,
to have a power of 80% to defe,
detect an effect size as large as 0.5.
And what I'm showing here, is that
the calculation is the same when I,
as I specify an equivalent effect
size of 0.5, whether its delta
of two over four or delta 100 over 200
its always giving me the same number.
Now what I'll leave is an exercise for
you guys, is to for
example omit delta and put in an n and
have power.t.test show you what's
the minimum detectable delta,
in order to detect, in order to have
80% power for a specific sample size.
And I think given the code that I've given
you here this shouldn't be too hard of a,
hard of a extension.
I would say that I, I almost always use
power.t.test as my first
attack on a power calculation.
One of the main reasons behind
this is that, power has a lot,
as I think I've maybe explained
throughout the lecture,
power has kind of a lot of knobs and
dials that you can turn.
And it's very easy to get tripped up on
thinking that you have better power than
you have or thinking that you
need a smaller sample size.
And so, when in doubt, try to make your
power calculations as simple as possible.
So try to revert the question that
you're asking down to a t test or
a binomial test, or something like
that in order to calculate power,
in order to calculate power
as simply as possible.
And that will give you maybe a slightly
conservative, either power or sample size
estimate, but on the other hand you'll
be able to understand it quite well.
From then you might want to move on to mo,
much more complex power calculations, but
as a first pass you always
want to do the t test power or
the normal calculation power or the basic
power calculation in a binomial problem,
as, as the very first thing that you do.